content/page/about.md, before:

---
title: "About"
date: 2019-04-10T22:04:36-05:00
draft: false
---

The mission of Chicago For EVs is to promote electrification of transport in Chicagoland and the state of Illinois. We approach that mission in two ways:

We are a group of plug-in electric vehicle owners and allies from the Chicagoland area. Our group is grassroots, brand-neutral, 
and run by volunteers. While most of us own electric cars, some of our active members don't (yet!), but nonetheless support our work.

The work we do in support of our mission can be split into two broad categories.

1. Education. For example, we hold [outreach events](/events/) to inform the general public about the benefits they would see 
if they switched to an electric car, and
2. Policy, We [organize grassroots actions](/action/) and work with state and local politicians, officials, and stakeholders to make our city, neighbouring communities, and the state as a whole into a place where sustainable transportation is accessible and convenient for all. 

We think both of those are crucial. 

People who want to get an EV may face barriers to owning one (say, if they can't charge at home),
 so our city or state should adopt policies that would eliminate or reduce those barriers. 
At the same time, even the most robust policies
will do little on their own, if the most people don't know that electric transportation can be a better option for them.

This is why Chicago For EVs is both a group for people who already understand how amazing EVs are, and want to spread the word to others, 
and also a group for people who want to work on systemic improvements to help our city and state reache its full potential in adopting clean 
transportation.

Commit message:

Update the About page with more information

content/page/about.md, after:

---
title: "About"
date: 2019-04-10T22:04:36-05:00
draft: false
---


## Who we are

Chicago For EVs is a group of plug-in electric vehicle owners and allies from the Chicagoland area. 

The mission of Chicago For EVs is to promote and accelerate the electrification of transport in Chicagoland and the state of Illinois. 
Our work can be split into two broad categories:

1. Education. We hold [outreach events](/events/) to inform the general public about the benefits they would see 
if they switched to an electric car, host talks, and spread knowledge about EVs.
2. Policy. We [organize grassroots actions](/action/) and work with state and local politicians, officials, and stakeholders to make our city, neighbouring communities, and the state as a whole into a place where sustainable transportation is accessible and convenient for all. 

We think both of those are crucial. 

People who want to get an EV may face barriers to owning one (say, if they can't charge at home),
 so our city or state should adopt policies that would eliminate or reduce those barriers. 
At the same time, even the most robust policies
will do little on their own, if the most people don't know that electric transportation can be a better option for them.

This is why Chicago For EVs is both a group for people who already understand how great EVs are, and want to spread the word to others, 
and also a group for people who want to work on systemic improvements to help our city and state reach its full potential in adopting clean 
transportation.

#### Do we only care about cars?

We focus on personal cars because that's where our group can achieve the greatest effect.

Multiple people have replaced their gas vehicles with EVs after attending one of our events. 
That means there are now that many fewer gas vehicles on the road,
and both carbon emissions and local air pollution are that much lower. 

But not everyone should have to buy an EV to enjoy
cleaner, more reliable, and comfortable transportation. That's why we support the electrification of mass transit,
and investment into cleaner and more innovative solutions to transportation overall — and recognize that many of those solutions
won't be about private cars. 

Our group is grassroots, brand-neutral, and run by volunteers. We welcome everyone — current EV owners and those who don't own electric cars 
but want to help the cause of electrifying transportation.
